Welcome to Slash Forward. In this episode we’ll
be looking at the final film in the Saw series,
Jigsaw, and assessing a final set of John Kramer’s
traps. How are these going to stack up to the
others? Let’s start by unpacking the storyline
to see what we can learn. Let’s get to it.
We open at the end of a high speed chase.
The suspect dips and bails, running to the
rooftop of a nearby building searching for
an X. He holds off the bloodthirsty officers
by informing them that if they don’t summon
Detective Halloran within seventeen minutes,
five people are going to die. Halloran gets
there and, despite a familiarity between the men,
he can’t help but to try to force the
information from him. With talks breaking
down, Edgar chooses to favor his own life,
triggering the device and starting our games.
We then transition, coincidentally,
to five strangers wearing bucket hats,
waking up in what appears to be a high-rent
industrial complex and chained to a cutting
wall. A familiar voice whispers over the PA
that this group is being offered the chance
to cleanse themselves of their filthy lies. If
they give blood, their lights will go green and
they’ll be allowed to move on. With no further
explanation, they get dragged in toward the wall.
Anna is the first to comprehend the situation,
and ends up squirtin all over the floor,
which releases her magical bucket.
Once the recognition settles in,
they all get to work, but Carly ends up
giving a bit too much as a result of her
struggling against it. The unfortunate
sleeper never got the memo, and we get
an uncharacteristic off-screen death as the
rest of them are pulled into the next room.
At the hospital, the detectives puzzle over
why nothing happened when Edgar pulled that
trigger. And with an overzealous officer
putting a bullet right next to his heart,
he won’t be giving any answers for a while
or possibly ever. So they hit the streets
to shake down any of his known associates.
Back at the kill shack they try to work some
things out and figure out what up. Anna the
optimist points out that there’s an advantage
that they’re playing a game That’s the spirit.
Meanwhile, in the broader world, we get a
cool reveal that these games will impose
themselves on the public. And, thereby, leave
behind evidence to track. Halloran then rolls
up on Logan, the badass coroner. He and
Elle use their special handheld plasma
cutters purchased specifically to propel
their department into the 21st century,
and find an entire cross section of ya boi’s
head missing. We then learn that the present
here is ten years post John Kramer. So,
in technological terms, anything goes.
Detective Hunt then rolls in and we
learn this trio has an interwoven
series of histories together. But we can’t get
into details, because Logan pulls a piece of
evidence confirming this man was intended
to die. They find on the usb drive an audio
message charging them with ensuring that various
sins against the innocent are atoned for. Got it.
At the shack, demon Billy rolls out with a simple
message and we are treated to some delightfully
appropriate comic relief. Before they can do any
real reconnaissance, the chains start up again so
they all start blurting out whatever they think
may be their most shameful transgressions with
no clear impact. Luckily, Mitch notices a tape
before it’s too late. Just grabbing it disengages
the pulleys, but they’re horrified to discover
the next stage disappears into the ceiling.
The tape reveals one of them to be a filthy
purse snatcher. The culprit must fess up and
play the old pick a needle carnival game,
with the options being saline solution,
acid or the antidote to the poison they were
injected with. Carly gets noticeably stressed
by this, allowing Ryan to easily out her.
He tries to force them into her when she
recognizes a number on one syringe that is the
equivalent of her score from the robbery, $3.53.
Despite this connection, she refuses to
choose, and they all begin to get yanked
on by their necks. Ryan is determined to save
this, however, and swings over to hit her with
all three syringes at once, releasing their
necks while ensuring her demise. Sure enough,
shortly after falling to the floor below, she
begins to leak to death from the ears and eyes.
Anna is beside herself about his actions, but they
are alive and when they check the special syringe,
there is what appears to be a combination to
the door lock. So, there is some balance here.
Meanwhile, we learn that they used the dental
records to ID the bucket vic. He was a bad
man who owed some money to the wrong people,
resulting in his wife getting killed. Also,
the recording is confirmed to be John Kramer.
So nooowww, they start taking this seriously.
Back at the farm, the combo works, allowing
them to pass into a colonial farmhouse set.
They chat a bit to figure out what makes them all
bad, and Anna has a hard time with this, claiming
her husband was the one responsible. Then Ryan
hits his limit and tries to smash his way out,
falling into a trap that wires up his calf
and slowly tightens down on him. Nearby there
is a tape. Mitch takes his time, trying to get
this right, but the pulleys go back and forth,
increasing the risk. Despite this, he
reaches in very slowly and retrieves it.
The message admonishes the trapster for trying
to take a shortcut, and recommends the handle.
Back with forensics, Elle notes the distinct
presence of trace amounts of animal fecal
matter on the victim’s body. Then they learn
there is another body, from the same group,
but with no clear connection to the first victim
otherwise. She has the mark of Jigsaw as well,
and it gets them all tingly inside. As the
detectives share some backstory, Hunt confirms
that Logan had been tortured in Fallujah, which
causes Halloran to wonder about his mental state.
Back home on the farm, the way is
revealed to them. Anna and Mitch
enter the silo and use teamwork to get
the remote, which also prevents their
escape before the door closes. Both groups
have a TV where Billy again critiques their
selfishness and segues this into the next
twist of the challenge - Ryan has to pull
the lever in order to save them. They then
get to watch each other sort it all out.
While that’s going on, Halloran decides to feel
things out, charming Elle with a little casual,
sexual banter in the workplace.
This makes his question about her
whereabouts when the victim was
murdered positively refreshing.
Then he confides with Logan that there
is a dark web forum for Jigsaw freaks,
and there were a lot of IP hits to the website
from their internal system. They’re trying to
get something concrete on Elle, but then their
labs come in and they have to run. They learn
that the blood under the victim’s fingernails
match that of John Kramer’s, a true mystery.
This gives enough time for the silo to start
filling up, but Ryan has settled on just staying
put for now. The grain does stop, but then they’re
forced to play human battleship with sharp,
metal objects. Anna points out that if they die,
Ryan is definitely going to die, which motivates
him to go ahead and yank that lever, severing
his leg but also opening multiple doors for them.
As the sun goes down, and their shifts come to
an end, Logan finds his assistant at her favorite
bar. Through a bit of talking, he discovers her
alibi was bogus, and she lied because she has a
hobby that makes her seem a likely suspect.
He convinces her to show him, so she takes
him to her secret studio, with Hunt following
close behind. We see that this is where she
goes to unwind and burn off her creative energies,
recreating John’s most beautiful contraptions. She
even has a rare one that was discovered via his
schematics, but wasn’t known to have been used.
They discuss this as Hunt takes some photos with
his old ass camera, while Edgar is woken up by
an injection to his IV and as Ryan screams over
the loss of his favorite shinbone. As we enter a
new day, Logan wakes up with Elle and shows off
his nasty back scars from torture. And we get
all caught up with new developments as Hunt is
sent off to fulfill the commissioner’s request
to ensure John Kramer is dead while Halloran
learns of Edgar’s disappearance overnight.
At the barn, a tractor comes on. A closer
inspection reveals a tape that’s just for Mitch.
He then gets pulled upward as the tape
informs us that his sin was lying about
the condition of his bike on cycletrader.
Now he will have to get to the motorcycle
brake handle without getting himself
juiced. Fed up with fear and doubt,
Anna Lara Crofts her way over to the blender,
but initially only provides encouragement.
When that fails, she jams up the wheel
for a bit so Mitch can continue to fail
even under easier circumstances, which
leads to him getting chewed up and spit out.
Meanwhile, Hunt is on scene at the cemetery,
ready to open the casket to rub it in these
reporters’ faces, except the casket contains
Edgar. With that turnabout putting them on edge,
they positively burst into Elle’s studio
where they quickly find a secret room
where she keeps all her best Jigsaw
tchotchkes, including Mitch’s body.
Hunt goes for Logan, his old pal, and
Logan is very cooperative in terms of
casting aspersions at Halloran. This ends
up working pretty well, because Hunt is IA
and has been investigating Halloran for some
time for non-serial killer related offenses. By
releasing Logan, Hunt is afforded the opportunity
to collect additional evidence from Edgar’s body,
including confirmation that the slug that
killed him likely came from Halloran’s gun.
Back at home, Logan gets a spooky
drop in from Elle, but it turns
out her awkwardness is just excitement,
because she’s located the game...somehow.
But since Halloran is their suspect,
they can’t call the cops. Plus,
she has a huge gun so he won’t stand a
chance. Unfortunately, he’s following them.
At the farm, Anna is trying to work through the
next door. She pops it open, then squeezes her
way in and pays for it. When she wakes up, she
finds herself chained in a new room with Ryan
and their abductor - the real John Kramer,
here to administer one final test for them.
Here we have a huge info dump revealing
that Ryan was tangentially responsible for
three deaths he never fessed up to, John’s
misfortune was primarily the result of his
advanced cancer going unnoticed due to a mixed
up chart, and he and Anna used to be neighbors.
From the sounds of her frustration next
door, John surmised that Anna killed her
baby in a moment of delirious exhaustion and
set it up like her husband did it on accident.
Elle and Logan then pull up to Tuck’s
pig farm, the birthright of Jill Tuck,
closed down due to a transmittable disease that
Elle matched to the traces of animal fecal matter,
because ya girl knows her shit! They head in right
as Halloran rolls up and screens Hunt’s call.
He had wanted to check in with him about
the flesh puzzle they found in his ice box.
John puts the finishing touches on the set
up. After letting them know they’ve got it
all backwards, and that the shell is their key
to freedom, we see the game only consists of a
shotgun in the middle of the room. That other
stuff was for something else he’s working on.
Meanwhile the others have been working their way
through and arrive at that one unique trap. This
causes Logan to become suspicious, but before
she can convince him otherwise, Halloran pops
in and takes control of the situation. Logan
gets cute, but a pipe wrench evens that out.
As the survivors try to
work out what it all means,
Anna takes it to be a mandate to kill Ryan
to set the scales of justice back on balance.
But they’ve been doing things backwards,
and a trick shot rips her face off.
Inside the shell? the way out. Proving, once
again, that Jigsaw is a master riddler. Er, wait?
Elsewhere, someone monkey shines Halloran, then
he and Logan wake up with some very fashionable
collars. They’re ordered to confess the reason
they deserve to die in order to be released.
This one’s a direct feedback as John is
all ears. They pull up, family feud style,
and Halloran volunteers Logan, although I’m
not sure that gains him anything. He then
confesses that he was the one who messed
up John’s charts all those years ago.
Despite this admission, the lasers turn
inward. Well, hopefully he learned something.
When Halloran gets his turn, there’s just
too much to choose from, so he lists it all.
Somehow, he hit the correct one,
because his collar seems to turn
off. But then Logan arises and we find out
this was all a contrivance to get Halloran
to admit that he killed innocent people on
tape so Logan can blame all of this on him.
The games that we watched occurred ten
years prior when John was still alive.
Logan was the sleepy fellow from the opening
about whom John had a change of heart. He then
nursed him back to health, obligating him to take
on the responsibility of being the next Jigsaw.
He recreated the game with perps we only saw
in death, and that would implicate Halloran,
the man Logan blames for his wife’s murder
by Edgar - an informant kept on the streets
due to Halloran’s thirst for being fully
informed. Logan had access to everything
he needed to make it look like John
was alive and set up the frame job.
Through further flashbacks we
learn Logan never acquired wisdom,
and that he’s been around from the start,
so we should all like him. Then, with no
consideration for how it fits into the overall
plan, he allows Halloran’s cranium to blossom.
Well, I have a lot of thoughts about that
one, maybe we can get to some of them in
our examination of the traps.
Overall, this one looked good,
but felt a bit sloppy and I’m not sure it
holds up to any sort of closer examination.
You have to go brain-off for this one. But
regardless, let’s figure out how to survive.
We started our journey with the bucket head trap
at the beginning. This is another in the series
that relies on providing limited information.
It appears these things were attached to their
neck collars with some magnetic pins?
They also set up in the beginning with
the plasma torches that this was potentially
going to utilize some sort of future tech,
but we then learned this happened in the past. So,
future tech is out. I do wonder if the magnetic
pins could have been disengaged by using the
opposite magnet from one of the other buckets,
but I’m not sure you would have vision of
it to be able to make that determination.
Regardless, this is another simple one.
The request was to give blood to move on.
The first victim does so, blood falls to the floor
and the saws retract. This is actually possible
with modern technology as there is a safety
saw designed specifically to identify skin to
blade contact and react within a fraction of a
second. It’s a very simple design that utilizes
electrical signals from the metal of the blade
coming in contact with flesh to jam itself up.
It doesn’t even distinguish. As an illustration,
the company uses a hotdog to show how it works.
This means that any of them could have just
barely nicked themselves to stop the saw,
and they could’ve done it for all of them,
including the sleeper. This is an easy one
to pass through if you have the knowledge and are
willing to give it a try, which is better than the
alternative. Realistically, how else could it know
that the right person gave blood, or a sufficient
amount of blood or whatever else. Even if John was
watching, that’s still pretty suspect. First off,
the fact that we don’t know if this was just the
game master pulling switches is a fault of the
shoddy writing. I’m going to take advantage of
that, because if you want to create a scenario
with tension and uncertainty, you have to think
your own way through it as well and communicate
that visually to us. Otherwise, it fails to
connect. Further, if John was just watching
via a camera and making his own choices about
who made a reasonable sacrifice, wouldn’t it
then also be possible to just fake it? Move like
you touched the wall and then cradle your arm and
double over like you’re in pain? That seems pretty
lame and non-technological for a Jigsaw game.
Next we found ourselves in the barn, which
started out as one thing, but then transitioned
to another. I don’t know why they didn’t spend
as much time as they could searching around
and trying to acclimate themselves to their
surroundings. When we ultimately do finish
up with an actual trap, we’re presented with
another one that seems poorly thought out.
Carly is to inject one of three syringes.
The choice of the syringe represents the risk
as it could kill her. But then all their
collars release. How does it know when she’s
done one? It could be there is a transmitter
that registers a plunger making contact,
closing the circuit and sending a release
signal. In that case, a syringe just needs
to be emptied rather than injected, and they
can all get out of their collars and spend more
time inspecting the clues and trying to figure
which of them is the correct combo to get out.
But, she did also have the problem that she
had been injected with a poison. It wasn’t
just that one syringe killed, but also that she
would passively die if she didn’t cure herself.
That’s a simple matter of observation.
Squeeze out a little of each one to test.
The acid should be easy to identify. The other
two are either saline or antidote, so you could
potentially do a small sniff or taste test to
confirm, then stick that sucker in and live.
The next room felt really contrived, which is
saying a lot. It starts with the porch trap
that locks up Ryan’s leg. This is a contingent
trap. It requires someone to attempt to break
the rules in order to become ensnared. I
do really question why he didn’t try to
quickly pull his leg out when the trap reversed
momentarily, but maybe that was just a surprise.
Regardless, it seems like there could be an
implement in here somewhere that could help them
pull this thing apart or keep it from
moving. The pulleys had holes in them.
The wires chopped up the wooden handle, but what
if something more sturdy had been crammed through
the holes. Without the chance to gain momentum,
this likely would have had a better effect.
But it also leads me to wonder, what would have
happened if no one had stepped into it? Or if
he had just sucked it up and pulled the lever?
It was the thing that ended the other game that
got initiated, but that success was completely
contingent on this secondary event that may have
never happened or still been underway. Seems like
an odd choice for setting up a trap. Without that,
I’m not sure the silo trap is survivable. The
grain part is horrifying, but then it stopped
while they still had their heads up. The grain is
more terrifying than the sharp objects falling.
And, since they weren’t buried, they likely
could have avoided the sharp objects by just
swimming over to the side of the silo where
the space above them is covered by the TV.
This would provide some protection and safety, but
survivability from there is uncertain sans lever.
The next disappointing trap is the motorcycle
blender. This one is confounding. It seems like
a trap that could have easily gone wrong at any
initial step, and resulted in not stringing Mitch
up by his ankle. If everything goes to plan,
you probably do need another person nearby,
which he had in Anna, and she had the right
idea. The motorcycle gear was fairly thin,
and it makes sense to try to knock it off
the rail or get it to stop or get crammed
up in some other way. Possibly there is a
control box or wiring nearby that was used
for the remote start? It’s not clear.
The primary factor preventing success
is with Mitch’s well-established habit of
reaching for things really, really slowly,
even when he’s really close to reaching it. He
did it with the tape player and does it again here
with the brake lever. Take nothing for granted.
Just because the trap momentarily stopped,
don’t presume it will stay stopped. Also, don’t
move, and make yourself as thin as possible. He
wasn’t reaching any further at the end than
he had been just before, but he got chunked
up when the machine came back on. Why would that
be, unless he used his moment of pause to stretch
out and puff himself up a bit. Huge mistake, as
illustrated by the actual outcome in the movie.
The last two obstacles are barely worth calling
traps, and we won’t spend too long discussing
them. The shotgun was more of a riddle than a
trap. This speaks to the rule we established
in another video of, if nothing’s happening,
do nothing. There’s no timer, John just left,
you’re just chained up. Why the sudden urgency
to take action and start bustin? If there are
trust issues with leaving the gun there, you
could disarm the gun. This will give time for
quiet contemplation without worry or distraction,
and could even lead you to inadvertently figure
out the clues completely on accident. Really,
you just have to keep your head on straight. If
you’re both there for killing people, why would
John want you to rectify that by killing people?
And then the laser collars. This is a bit
of sci-fi fantasy here, but an interesting
concept. This was a retributive trap, meant to
kill. And while you’re attached to the wall,
the perpetrator is right there. Therefore,
there are very few options open to you. If
the circumstances were different, and we
were just dealing with the collar itself,
it seems the weakest part here is it’s frailty.
You have these little knobs here turning around
and pointing lasers all over. I’d start by
just twisting on each of them and stripping
out the gears that control their motion. The only
true equivalent we have for judging future tech
is Sharper Image. If they’re anything like
every item ever sold through Sharper Image,
their construction is likely as delicate as a
baby bird. Just break them and let them dangle.
Well then, that was a lot of traps over time.
TOT. I hope a lot of lessons were tucked away
for later. The quest for learning how to beat
various horrendous situations marches on,
but likely with fewer opportunities to
directly address these types of elaborate
dangers. Until the next episode, I
hope this knowledge serves you well.
Before we go, I’d like to give a huge thanks to
my donors, memorialized in the hall of headshots.
I have a website set up where you can
support the channel through donations or
merch. Any donation unlocks uncensored movie
reviews of Lifeforce and Under the Skin,
with others to be added over
time. If you enjoyed the video,
I’d love for you to become a part of the
channel by subscribing. Thanks for watching.